hack/rpm/README.md, before:

# Using YUM/DNF to install the Tanzu CLI

YUM and DNF (the replacement for YUM) use RPM packages for installation. This
document describes how to build such packages for the Tanzu CLI, how to push
them to a public repository and how to install the CLI from that repository.

## Building the RPM package

Executing the `hack/rpm/build_package.sh` script will build the RPM packages
under `hack/rpm/_output`. The `hack/rpm/build_package.sh` script is meant to
be run on a Linux machine that has `dnf` or `yum` installed.
This can be done in docker using the `fedora` image. To facilitate this
operation, the new `rpm-package` Makefile target has been added; this Makefile
target will first start a docker container and then run the
`hack/rpm/build_package.sh` script.

### Pre-requisite

`make cross-build` should be run first to build the `tanzu` binary for linux
in the location expected by the scripts.  To save time, the shorter
`make build-cli-linux-amd64` target can be used.

```bash
cd tanzu-cli
make rpm-package
```

Note that two packages will be built, one for AMD64 and one for ARM64. Also, a
repository will be generated as a directory called `_output/rpm` which will
contain the two built packages as well as some metadata. Please see the section
on publishing the repository for more details.

## Testing the installation of the Tanzu CLI locally

We can install the Tanzu CLI using the newly built RPM repository locally on a
Linux machine with `yum` or `dnf` installed or using a docker container. For
example, using `yum`:

```bash
$ cd tanzu-cli
$ docker run --rm -it -v $(pwd)/hack/rpm/_output/rpm:/tmp/rpm fedora
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/yum.repos.d/tanzu-cli.repo
[tanzu-cli]
name=Tanzu CLI
baseurl=file:///tmp/rpm/tanzu-cli
enabled=1
gpgcheck=0
EOF
yum install -y tanzu-cli
tanzu
```

Note that when building locally, the repository isn't signed, so you may see warnings during installation.

## Publishing the package to GCloud

The GCloud bucket dedicated to hosting the Tanzu CLI OS packages is
gs://tanzu-cli-os-packages`.

To publish the repository containing the new rpm packages for the Tanzu CLI, we
must upload the entire `rpm` directory located at `tanzu-cli/hack/rpm/_output/rpm`
to the root of the bucket.  Note that it is the second `rpm` directory that must be
uploaded. You can do this manually. Once uploaded, the Tanzu CLI
can be installed publicly as described in the next section.

## Installing the Tanzu CLI

```bash
$ docker run --rm -it fedora
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/yum.repos.d/tanzu-cli.repo
[tanzu-cli]
name=Tanzu CLI
baseurl=https://storage.googleapis.com/tanzu-cli-os-packages/rpm/tanzu-cli
enabled=1
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=1
gpgkey=https://packages.vmware.com/tools/keys/VMWARE-PACKAGING-GPG-RSA-KEY.pub
EOF
yum install -y tanzu-cli
```

Commit message:

Build the RPM repository incrementally
A requirement that we have is that our repo is on a GCP bucket
(at least for the moment).  Therefore, all existing versions of the CLI
packages are on the bucket and not on the machine where we build the
repo.  We don't want to have to download every package from the bucket
to be able to build a new repo as this would take more and more time
as we accumulate versions.  Instead we want to build the repo
incrementally by simply adding a new package version to it.

After investigation, the best we I found to do this was to download the
existing repo metadata, locally create empty packages for the existing
packages, and the rebuild the metadata with using:
  createrepo --update --skip-stat

This approach re-uses the previous metadata but adds to it the new
package versions.

This commit also numbers pre-releases appropriately for RPM.
In case we ever put pre-release packages in a repo along with final
releases, it is important that the pre-releases be numbered as such
for RPM to prioritize the final releases.

The commit also does a little cleanup to use a loop per architecture.

Signed-off-by: Marc Khouzam <kmarc@vmware.com>

hack/rpm/README.md, after:

# Using YUM/DNF to install the Tanzu CLI

YUM and DNF (the replacement for YUM) use RPM packages for installation. This
document describes how to build such packages for the Tanzu CLI, how to push
them to a public repository and how to install the CLI from that repository.

## Building the RPM package

Executing the `hack/rpm/build_package.sh` script will build the RPM packages
under `hack/rpm/_output`. The `hack/rpm/build_package.sh` script is meant to
be run on a Linux machine that has `dnf` or `yum` installed.
This can be done in docker using the `fedora` image. To facilitate this
operation, the new `rpm-package` Makefile target has been added; this Makefile
target will first start a docker container and then run the
`hack/rpm/build_package.sh` script.

The remote location of the existing repository can be overridden by setting
the variable `RPM_METADATA_BASE_URI`.  For example, the default value for
this variable is currently `https://storage.googleapis.com/tanzu-cli-os-packages`

### Pre-requisite

`make cross-build` should be run first to build the `tanzu` binary for linux
in the location expected by the scripts.  To save time, the shorter
`make build-cli-linux-amd64` target can be used.

```bash
cd tanzu-cli
make rpm-package
```

Note that two packages will be built, one for AMD64 and one for ARM64. Also, a
repository will be generated as a directory called `_output/rpm` which will
contain the two built packages as well as some metadata. Please see the section
on publishing the repository for more details.

## Testing the installation of the Tanzu CLI locally

We can install the Tanzu CLI using the newly built RPM repository locally on a
Linux machine with `yum` or `dnf` installed or using a docker container. For
example, using `yum`:

```bash
$ cd tanzu-cli
$ docker run --rm -it -v $(pwd)/hack/rpm/_output/rpm:/tmp/rpm fedora
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/yum.repos.d/tanzu-cli.repo
[tanzu-cli]
name=Tanzu CLI
baseurl=file:///tmp/rpm/tanzu-cli
enabled=1
gpgcheck=0
EOF
yum install -y tanzu-cli
tanzu
```

Note that when building locally, the repository isn't signed, so you may see warnings during installation.

## Publishing the package to GCloud

The GCloud bucket dedicated to hosting the Tanzu CLI OS packages is
gs://tanzu-cli-os-packages`.

Publishing the new repository must be done in two steps because we build the
repository incrementally.  Building the repo incrementally means that we create the
repository metadata for the new package version *and* for any existing packages on
the bucket without downloading the older packages.  This implies that we *must* not
delete the older packages from the bucket but instead we must:

1. upload the new packages to the bucket under rpm/tanzu-cli/
2. replace the entire repodata directory located on the bucket at rpm/tanzu-cli/repodata/

If we want to publish to a brand new bucket, we need to build the repo with
`RPM_METADATA_BASE_URI=new` then upload the entire `rpm`
directory located locally at `tanzu-cli/hack/rpm/_output/rpm` to the root of the bucket.
Note that it is the second `rpm` directory that must be uploaded. You can do this manually.
Once uploaded, the Tanzu CLI can be installed publicly as described in the next section.

## Installing the Tanzu CLI

```bash
$ docker run --rm -it fedora
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/yum.repos.d/tanzu-cli.repo
[tanzu-cli]
name=Tanzu CLI
baseurl=https://storage.googleapis.com/tanzu-cli-os-packages/rpm/tanzu-cli
enabled=1
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=1
gpgkey=https://packages.vmware.com/tools/keys/VMWARE-PACKAGING-GPG-RSA-KEY.pub
EOF
yum install -y tanzu-cli
```
