hack/apt/README.md, before:

# Using APT to install the Tanzu CLI

APT uses Debian packages for installation. This document describes how to build
such packages for the Tanzu CLI, how to push them to a public repository and
how to install the CLI from that repository.

## Building the Debian package

Executing the `hack/apt/build_package.sh` script will build the Debian packages
under `hack/apt/_output`. The `hack/apt/build_package.sh` script is meant to
be run on a Linux machine that has `apt` installed. This can be done in
docker.

Then the `hack/apt/build_package_repo.sh` needs to be executed to build the
Debian repository containing the packages.

To facilitate this operation, the `apt-package` Makefile target can be used;
this Makefile target will first start a docker container and then
run the `hack/apt/build_package*.sh` scripts.

### Pre-requisite

`make cross-build` should be run first to build the `tanzu` binary for linux
in the location expected by the scripts.  To save time, the shorter
`make build-cli-linux-amd64` target can be used.

```bash
cd tanzu-cli
make apt-package
```

Note that two packages will be built, one for AMD64 and one for ARM64. Also, a
repository will be generated as a directory called `_output/apt` which will
contain the two built packages. Please see the section on publishing the
repository for more details.

## Using fedora

The package build scripts support building on a fedora machine.
This can be done using `make apt-package APT_BUILDER_IMAGE=fedora`.

## Testing the installation of the Tanzu CLI locally

We can install the Tanzu CLI using the newly built Debian repository locally on
a Linux machine with `apt` installed or using a docker container. For example:

```bash
$ cd tanzu-cli
$ docker run --rm -it -v $(pwd)/hack/apt/_output/apt:/tmp/apt ubuntu
echo "deb file:///tmp/apt tanzu-cli-jessie main" | tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/tanzu.list
apt-get update --allow-insecure-repositories
apt install -y tanzu-cli --allow-unauthenticated
tanzu
```

Note that when building loocally, the repository isn't signed, so you may see warnings
during installation.

## Publishing the package to GCloud

The GCloud bucket dedicated to hosting the Tanzu CLI OS packages is
gs://tanzu-cli-os-packages`.

To publish the repository containing the new debian packages for the Tanzu CLI,
we must upload the entire `apt` directory located at `tanzu-cli/hack/apt/_output/apt`
to the root of the bucket.  Note that it is the second `apt` directory that must be
uploaded. You can do this manually. Once uploaded, the Tanzu CLI can be installed
publicly as described in the next section.

## Installing the Tanzu CLI

```bash
$ docker run --rm -it ubuntu
apt update
apt install -y ca-certificates curl
curl -fsSL https://packages.vmware.com/tools/keys/VMWARE-PACKAGING-GPG-RSA-KEY.pub | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /etc/apt/keyrings/tanzu-archive-keyring.gpg
echo "deb [signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/tanzu-archive-keyring.gpg] https://storage.googleapis.com/tanzu-cli-os-packages/apt tanzu-cli-jessie main" | tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/tanzu.list
apt update
apt install -y tanzu-cli
```

Commit message:

Don't use reprepro for building the apt repo
Reprepro does not allow to have more than one version of a package in
the same repo.  Since we want to keep multiple version of the CLI
packages available, we can no longer use reprepro.

Another requirement that we have is that our repo is on a GCP bucket
(at least for the moment).  Therefore, all existing versions of the CLI
packages are on the bucket and not on the machine where we build the
repo.  We don't want to have to download every package from the bucket
to be able to build a new repo as this would take more and more time
as we accumulate versions.  Instead we want to build the repo
incrementally by simply adding a new package version to it.

After investigating different alternatives, mostly `aptly`, it became
apparent that building a repository incrementally was not easy to do
with existing tools.  On the other hand, building the repo manually
ourselves turned out to be relatively easy.

Therefore, this commit replaces `reprepro` with a homemade script
that allows us to add a new version to an existing repo without having
to have the entire set of packages on the local machine.

Signed-off-by: Marc Khouzam <kmarc@vmware.com>

hack/apt/README.md, after:

# Using APT to install the Tanzu CLI

APT uses Debian packages for installation. This document describes how to build
such packages for the Tanzu CLI, how to push them to a public repository and
how to install the CLI from that repository.

## Building the Debian package

Executing the `hack/apt/build_package.sh` script will build the Debian packages
under `hack/apt/_output`. The `hack/apt/build_package.sh` script is meant to
be run on a Linux machine that has `apt` installed. This can be done in
docker.

Then the `hack/apt/build_package_repo.sh` needs to be executed to build the
Debian repository containing the packages.

To facilitate this operation, the `apt-package` Makefile target can be used;
this Makefile target will first start a docker container and then
run the `hack/apt/build_package*.sh` scripts.

The remote location of the existing repository can be overridden by setting
the variable `DEB_METADATA_BASE_URI`.  For example, the default value for
this variable is currently `https://storage.googleapis.com/tanzu-cli-os-packages`

### Pre-requisite

`make cross-build` should be run first to build the `tanzu` binary for linux
in the location expected by the scripts.  To save time, the shorter
`make build-cli-linux-amd64` target can be used.

```bash
cd tanzu-cli
make apt-package
```

Note that two packages will be built, one for AMD64 and one for ARM64. Also, a
repository will be generated as a directory called `_output/apt` which will
contain the two built packages. Please see the section on publishing the
repository for more details.

## Using fedora

The package build scripts support building on a fedora machine.
This can be done using `make apt-package APT_BUILDER_IMAGE=fedora`.

## Testing the installation of the Tanzu CLI locally

We can install the Tanzu CLI using the newly built Debian repository locally on
a Linux machine with `apt` installed or using a docker container. For example:

```bash
$ cd tanzu-cli
$ docker run --rm -it -v $(pwd)/hack/apt/_output/apt:/tmp/apt ubuntu
echo "deb file:///tmp/apt tanzu-cli-jessie main" | tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/tanzu.list
apt-get update --allow-insecure-repositories
apt install -y tanzu-cli --allow-unauthenticated
tanzu
```

Note that when building locally, the repository isn't signed, so you may see warnings
during installation.

## Publishing the package to GCloud

The GCloud bucket dedicated to hosting the Tanzu CLI OS packages is
gs://tanzu-cli-os-packages`.

Publishing the new repository must be done in two steps because we build the
repository incrementally.  Building the repo incrementally means that we create the
repository metadata for the new package version *and* for any existing packages on
the bucket without downloading the older packages.  This implies that we *must* not
delete the older packages from the bucket but instead we must:

1. upload the new packages to the bucket under apt/pool/main/t/tanzu-cli/
2. replace the entire metadata located on the bucket at apt/dists

If we want to publish to a brand new bucket, we need to build the repo with
`DEB_METADATA_BASE_URI=new` then upload the entire `apt`
directory located locally at `tanzu-cli/hack/apt/_output/apt` to the root of the bucket.
Note that it is the second `apt` directory that must be uploaded. You can do this manually.
Once uploaded, the Tanzu CLI can be installed publicly as described in the next section.

## Installing the Tanzu CLI

```bash
$ docker run --rm -it ubuntu
apt update
apt install -y ca-certificates curl gpg
curl -fsSL https://packages.vmware.com/tools/keys/VMWARE-PACKAGING-GPG-RSA-KEY.pub | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /etc/apt/keyrings/tanzu-archive-keyring.gpg
echo "deb [signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/tanzu-archive-keyring.gpg] https://storage.googleapis.com/tanzu-cli-os-packages/apt tanzu-cli-jessie main" | tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/tanzu.list
apt update
apt install -y tanzu-cli
```
